Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
pressure measurement and transducers. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. Why is the measurement of pressure so important in anaesthesia,
and what pressures do we measure?
The measurement of pressure is one of the most pervasive and important forms of
measurement in anaesthesia and critical care,
because so many of the variables that guide our management are pressures,
and their accurate measurement and interpretation underpin safe practice.
Pressure, defined as force per unit area,
is measured throughout our practice in a great variety of contexts.
We measure the arterial blood pressure, both non-invasively and,
when high accuracy or beat-to-beat information is needed,
invasively through an arterial cannula.
We measure the central venous pressure as a guide to filling and right heart
function, and, in selected patients, the pulmonary arterial and wedge pressures.
We measure airway pressures during ventilation to guard against barotrauma and to
assess respiratory mechanics, and the pressures within the breathing system and the
anaesthetic machine. We measure the pressures of the gas supplies,
in cylinders and pipelines.
In particular settings we measure intracranial pressure,
intra-abdominal and compartment pressures, and others.
Each of these requires a method suited to the magnitude of the pressure,
the accuracy and the dynamic response needed, and the invasiveness acceptable.
Understanding the principles of pressure measurement, the devices used,
and their sources of error is therefore fundamental to interpreting these
measurements correctly and recognising when they are unreliable.
So pressure measurement is important because arterial, venous, pulmonary, airway,
gas-supply, intracranial and other pressures guide our management throughout
anaesthesia and critical care, each requiring a method suited to its magnitude,
accuracy and dynamic response, and an understanding of the principles,
devices and errors of pressure measurement is fundamental to their correct
interpretation.
Distinguish the ways in which pressure may be measured.
Pressure may be measured by several fundamentally different approaches,
and distinguishing them provides a framework for the devices we use.
A first distinction is between direct and indirect measurement.
Direct measurement senses the pressure itself,
by connecting the pressure to a device that responds to it,
as when an arterial cannula transmits the blood pressure to a transducer;
this gives continuous, accurate, beat-to-beat information but is invasive.
Indirect measurement infers the pressure from some external effect,
as when a blood pressure cuff infers the arterial pressure from the pressure at
which flow is occluded or restored;
this is non-invasive but intermittent and less precise.
A second distinction concerns the physical principle by which the device responds
to pressure. Some devices balance the pressure against the weight of a liquid
column, the manometer principle, in which the pressure supports a height of fluid.
Others balance the pressure against the elastic deformation of a mechanical
element, such as the curved tube of a Bourdon gauge or a metal diaphragm or
capsule, the aneroid principle, the deformation indicating the pressure.
Modern electronic devices convert the pressure into an electrical signal by a
transducer, typically through the deformation of a diaphragm sensed by a strain
gauge, allowing the pressure to be displayed, recorded and processed electronically.
The choice depends on the magnitude of the pressure,
the accuracy and dynamic response required,
and whether continuous electronic output is needed.
So pressure may be measured directly,
sensing the pressure itself invasively for continuous accurate data, or indirectly,
inferring it non-invasively; and by balancing it against a liquid column,
against the elastic deformation of a mechanical element, or, in modern practice,
by an electronic transducer converting it to an electrical signal.
Describe the liquid manometer and its principle.
The liquid column manometer is the simplest and most fundamental pressure-measuring
device, embodying the hydrostatic principle,
and although now largely replaced by electronic transducers for clinical
monitoring, it remains the conceptual basis of pressure measurement and of the
units we use.
The manometer measures pressure by balancing it against the weight of a column of
liquid: the pressure to be measured is applied to one side of a liquid in a tube,
and it supports, or displaces, a column of the liquid whose height indicates the
pressure.
By the hydrostatic relationship, the pressure exerted by a liquid column equals the
height of the column multiplied by the density of the liquid and the acceleration
due to gravity, so that for a given liquid the height is directly proportional to
the pressure.
Mercury, being very dense, supports only a short,
manageable column for the pressures of the arterial circulation,
which is why blood pressure is traditionally expressed in millimetres of mercury —
the height of mercury the pressure supports.
Water, being less dense, gives a taller,
more sensitive column for the lower pressures of the venous system and airway,
expressed in centimetres of water.
The manometer is simple, requires no calibration in the usual sense,
and is accurate for steady pressures, but it responds slowly,
cannot follow rapid pressure changes such as the arterial waveform,
and the mercury type carries the hazard of toxic mercury.
So the liquid manometer measures pressure by the hydrostatic principle,
balancing it against a column of liquid whose height — proportional to the pressure
through the height, density and gravity — indicates the pressure,
using dense mercury for arterial pressures and water for lower venous and airway
pressures; simple and accurate for steady pressures but slow and unable to follow
rapid changes.
Describe the aneroid and Bourdon gauges.
The aneroid gauge, of which the Bourdon gauge is the principal example,
measures pressure by the elastic deformation of a mechanical element rather than by
a liquid column, and it is widely used for measuring gas pressures and as a robust
mechanical gauge.
The term aneroid means without liquid,
distinguishing these gauges from the liquid manometer.
The Bourdon gauge, encountered earlier in the context of the anaesthetic machine,
consists of a coiled or curved flexible metal tube,
flattened in cross-section and closed at one end;
the pressure to be measured is admitted into the tube, and as the pressure rises,
the tube tends to uncoil or straighten,
because the higher pressure within the flattened tube tends to make its
cross-section more circular and so to straighten it.
This movement of the free end is transmitted through a mechanical linkage and
gearing to a pointer that moves over a calibrated scale, indicating the pressure.
The Bourdon gauge is robust, reliable and suitable for high pressures,
which is why it is used to measure cylinder and pipeline pressures.
Other aneroid gauges use the deflection of a thin metal diaphragm or an evacuated
metal capsule under pressure, the deformation indicating the pressure,
as in some older blood-pressure gauges and altimeters.
The aneroid gauges require calibration and can be subject to mechanical wear and
drift.
So the aneroid gauges, principally the Bourdon gauge,
measure pressure by the elastic deformation of a mechanical element — the Bourdon
gauge by the uncoiling of a curved flattened tube as pressure rises,
moving a pointer over a scale — being robust and suitable for the high pressures of
gas cylinders and pipelines, while diaphragm and capsule types use the deflection
of a metal element.
Explain the non-invasive measurement of arterial blood pressure.
The non-invasive measurement of arterial blood pressure, using a cuff,
is the routine method of blood pressure monitoring,
and understanding its methods and their basis is important for interpreting the
readings and recognising their limitations.
The principle common to these methods is the use of an inflatable cuff around a
limb, which is inflated to occlude the artery and then deflated,
the pressures at which flow changes indicating the arterial pressure.
There are two main methods.
The auscultatory method, the traditional manual technique,
inflates the cuff above systolic pressure to occlude the artery,
then deflates it slowly while listening over the artery distally with a stethoscope
for the Korotkoff sounds: the pressure at which the sounds first appear,
as blood begins to spurt through, indicates the systolic pressure,
and the pressure at which they disappear, as flow becomes continuous,
indicates the diastolic pressure.
The oscillometric method, used by automated non-invasive monitors,
inflates the cuff and then deflates it in steps or continuously while sensing the
small oscillations in cuff pressure transmitted from the arterial pulsations:
the oscillations begin as the cuff pressure falls below systolic,
reach a maximum amplitude at the mean arterial pressure,
and diminish below diastolic.
The monitor identifies the mean arterial pressure as the point of maximal
oscillation, which it measures most directly and reliably,
and derives the systolic and diastolic pressures from the oscillation pattern by an
algorithm.
So non-invasive blood pressure is measured by a cuff:
the auscultatory method detecting the Korotkoff sounds of returning flow for
systolic and diastolic pressure, and the automated oscillometric method sensing
cuff-pressure oscillations, identifying the mean arterial pressure most reliably at
maximal oscillation and deriving systolic and diastolic by algorithm.
What are the sources of error in non-invasive blood pressure measurement?
Non-invasive blood pressure measurement, though convenient and routine,
is subject to a number of errors that the anaesthetist must recognise,
since an erroneous reading may mislead management.
The most important and common source of error is an incorrect cuff size relative to
the limb.
A cuff that is too narrow, or too small for the limb, gives a falsely high reading,
because more pressure is needed to occlude the artery through the greater bulk;
a cuff that is too wide or too large gives a falsely low reading.
The cuff width should be an appropriate proportion of the limb circumference,
about forty per cent, and the bladder should encircle most of the limb.
Other errors arise from the position of the cuff relative to the heart:
a limb below heart level gives a falsely high reading and one above gives a falsely
low reading, by the hydrostatic pressure of the height difference,
so the cuff should be at heart level.
Movement, shivering and a cuff applied over clothing cause errors,
particularly with the oscillometric method, which relies on detecting oscillations.
Irregular rhythms such as atrial fibrillation make the oscillometric measurement
unreliable, as the beat-to-beat variation confuses the algorithm.
At the extremes of pressure, in severe hypotension or hypertension,
and in conditions of poor peripheral perfusion, the readings become less reliable,
and the oscillometric method may fail. Too-frequent cycling can cause venous
congestion and limb injury.
So non-invasive blood pressure errors arise chiefly from an incorrect cuff size —
too small reading high, too large reading low — from the cuff not being at heart
level, from movement and irregular rhythms confusing the oscillometric method,
and from unreliability at extremes of pressure and in poor perfusion.
Describe the system used for invasive arterial pressure measurement.
Invasive arterial pressure measurement, which provides continuous,
beat-to-beat display of the arterial pressure and waveform,
employs a system connecting the artery to an electronic transducer,
and understanding its components is essential to using it correctly and recognising
its errors.
The system comprises several parts in sequence.
An arterial cannula is placed in a peripheral artery, commonly the radial,
and transmits the arterial pressure.
The cannula is connected by a length of stiff,
non-compliant fluid-filled tubing to the transducer;
the tubing must be stiff and short to transmit the pressure faithfully.
A continuous flush system, a bag of saline under pressure delivering a slow
continuous flush of a few millilitres per hour through the line,
keeps the cannula and tubing patent and prevents the blood clotting and damping the
signal.
The transducer, at the end of the tubing,
converts the pressure of the fluid column into an electrical signal.
A three-way tap allows the transducer to be opened to the atmosphere for zeroing.
The electrical signal from the transducer is amplified,
processed and displayed by the monitor as a continuous pressure waveform and the
derived systolic, diastolic and mean pressures.
The fluid-filled column transmits the arterial pressure to the transducer,
so that the fidelity of the measurement depends on the mechanical properties of
this fluid-filled system — its stiffness, the absence of air bubbles,
and its dynamic response.
So invasive arterial pressure is measured by a system comprising an arterial
cannula, stiff fluid-filled tubing,
a continuous pressurised flush keeping the line patent,
a transducer converting the fluid pressure to an electrical signal,
and a monitor displaying the waveform and pressures — the fidelity depending on the
mechanical properties of the fluid-filled column.
Explain the principle of the pressure transducer.
The pressure transducer is the device that converts the pressure transmitted
through the fluid-filled column into an electrical signal,
and understanding its principle, based on the strain gauge and the Wheatstone
bridge, is central to understanding modern electronic pressure measurement.
A transducer is any device that converts one form of energy or signal into another;
the pressure transducer converts a pressure into an electrical signal.
The pressure of the fluid column is applied to a thin diaphragm within the
transducer, causing it to deflect very slightly in proportion to the pressure.
This minute deflection is sensed by a strain gauge — a fine wire or semiconductor
element whose electrical resistance changes when it is stretched or compressed,
because stretching a wire makes it longer and thinner, increasing its resistance.
The strain gauge is bonded to or linked with the diaphragm,
so that the deflection of the diaphragm strains the gauge and changes its
resistance in proportion to the pressure.
To measure this small change in resistance accurately,
the strain gauges — usually four, arranged so that some are stretched and others
compressed — are connected in a Wheatstone bridge circuit,
a sensitive arrangement of four resistances that produces an output voltage
proportional to the imbalance caused by the change in the strain gauges'
resistance, and hence proportional to the pressure.
This small voltage is amplified and processed to give the displayed pressure.
The transducer must be excited by a supply voltage and calibrated.
So the pressure transducer converts pressure to an electrical signal by applying
the pressure to a diaphragm whose slight deflection strains a strain gauge,
changing its resistance; the strain gauges are arranged in a Wheatstone bridge that
produces an output voltage proportional to the pressure,
which is amplified and displayed.
Explain zeroing and levelling of the transducer, and why they matter.
Zeroing and levelling are two essential steps in setting up invasive pressure
measurement, and getting them right is fundamental,
because errors in either directly falsify the displayed pressure,
yet they are easily neglected.
Zeroing is the process of establishing the reference point at which the transducer
reads zero, by opening the transducer to the atmosphere through the three-way tap,
so that it is exposed to atmospheric pressure,
and instructing the monitor to set this as zero;
thereafter the transducer measures pressure relative to atmospheric, that is,
gauge pressure, which is what we wish to display.
Zeroing corrects for any offset or drift in the transducer and must be performed at
setup and repeated periodically.
Levelling concerns the height at which the transducer is placed,
and it matters because of the hydrostatic pressure of the fluid column between the
patient and the transducer.
The transducer must be placed at the level of the reference point in the patient —
for arterial and central venous pressure, the level of the right atrium,
approximated by the phlebostatic axis at the mid-axillary line at the fourth
intercostal space.
If the transducer is placed below this level,
the additional hydrostatic pressure of the fluid column makes it read falsely high;
if placed above, it reads falsely low,
the error being the height difference expressed as a pressure.
Thus a transducer that has been moved, or a patient whose position has changed,
will give erroneous readings unless re-levelled.
So zeroing opens the transducer to atmosphere to set the reference at atmospheric
pressure, correcting offset, while levelling places the transducer at the reference
point, the right atrial level or phlebostatic axis,
to avoid the hydrostatic error of a height difference — both essential,
since errors in either directly falsify the pressure,
especially the lower venous pressures.
What is meant by the dynamic response of the measuring system?
The dynamic response of the invasive pressure-measuring system describes its
ability to follow rapidly changing pressures faithfully,
and it is a crucial concept, because the arterial pressure is a rapidly changing
waveform and a system with poor dynamic response distorts it,
giving erroneous systolic and diastolic values even when the mean is correct.
The arterial pressure waveform is not a steady pressure but a complex,
rapidly fluctuating signal, which can be regarded, by Fourier analysis,
as the sum of a fundamental sine wave at the heart rate and a series of harmonics
at higher frequencies; to reproduce the waveform faithfully,
the measuring system must respond accurately to all these frequency components,
up to perhaps the tenth harmonic.
The dynamic response of the fluid-filled system is characterised by two properties:
its natural, or resonant, frequency and its damping.
The natural frequency is the frequency at which the system tends to oscillate when
disturbed, determined by the mechanical properties of the fluid-filled column — it
is higher when the system is stiff, short and contains a low mass of fluid,
and lower when the tubing is long, compliant, or contains air.
For faithful reproduction, the natural frequency of the system should be well above
the highest frequency component of the waveform,
so that the system does not resonate within the range of frequencies present.
If the natural frequency is too low,
the system resonates with the waveform's harmonics, exaggerating the signal.
The damping determines how oscillations are suppressed.
So the dynamic response is the system's ability to follow the rapidly changing
arterial waveform, which comprises a fundamental and many harmonics;
it is characterised by the natural frequency,
which should be high — favoured by stiff, short,
bubble-free tubing — so the system does not resonate within the waveform's
frequencies, and by the damping.
Explain damping and the concept of optimal damping.
Damping is the second property determining the dynamic response of the
pressure-measuring system, and understanding it,
together with the concept of optimal damping,
explains the common distortions of the invasive arterial trace and how to recognise
them.
Damping is the progressive dissipation of the energy of oscillation in a system,
tending to reduce and flatten oscillations;
in the fluid-filled pressure system it arises from friction and viscous resistance
to the movement of fluid, increased by narrow tubing, air bubbles, clots and taps.
The degree of damping critically affects how the system responds to the pressure
waveform.
An underdamped system, with too little damping,
allows the signal to oscillate excessively and overshoot,
so that the displayed waveform shows exaggerated,
sharp peaks — overestimating the systolic and underestimating the diastolic
pressure — with added oscillations, or ringing.
An overdamped system, with too much damping, suppresses the signal sluggishly,
so that the waveform is blunted and slurred — underestimating the systolic and
overestimating the diastolic pressure,
and losing detail — though the mean pressure remains accurate in both cases.
Optimal damping is the degree of damping that allows the system to respond as
quickly as possible while just avoiding overshoot and oscillation,
faithfully reproducing the waveform; in practice a slightly underdamped value,
a damping coefficient around zero point six to zero point seven,
gives the best compromise of fidelity and speed.
Causes of underdamping and overdamping should be sought and corrected.
So damping is the dissipation of oscillation,
arising from friction in the fluid system;
an underdamped system exaggerates systolic and shows ringing,
an overdamped system blunts the trace and underestimates systolic,
while the mean stays accurate, and optimal damping,
around zero point six to zero point seven,
faithfully reproduces the waveform with the fastest response.
How is the dynamic response of the system tested at the bedside?
The dynamic response of an invasive pressure system — its natural frequency and
damping — can be assessed quickly at the bedside by a simple manoeuvre,
the flush or square-wave test, and being able to perform and interpret it is a
valuable skill for confirming the reliability of the arterial trace.
The test exploits the fast-flush device incorporated in the continuous flush system.
When the fast flush is briefly activated and then released,
it suddenly exposes the transducer to the high pressure of the flush bag and then
abruptly returns it to the arterial pressure,
generating a sharp square-wave step that disturbs the system and provokes it to
respond, revealing its dynamic behaviour.
After the flush is released, the trace shows how the system settles:
in an optimally damped system, the trace returns to the baseline waveform after a
small number of rapidly diminishing oscillations — typically one or two — before
resuming the arterial waveform.
The natural frequency can be estimated from the distance between the oscillations,
and the damping from how quickly they diminish.
An underdamped system shows many oscillations that diminish slowly, ringing,
after the flush.
An overdamped system shows no oscillations at all,
the trace returning slowly and sluggishly to baseline without overshoot.
Recognising these patterns allows the anaesthetist to judge whether the displayed
systolic and diastolic pressures are reliable,
and to seek and correct causes of underdamping or overdamping, such as air bubbles,
clots, long compliant tubing or kinks.
So the dynamic response is tested by the fast-flush, or square-wave, test,
in which releasing a brief flush produces a step that provokes the system:
an optimally damped system shows one or two rapidly diminishing oscillations,
an underdamped one shows prolonged ringing,
and an overdamped one shows a sluggish return without oscillation — allowing the
reliability of the trace to be judged and faults corrected.
What are the sources of error and artefact in invasive pressure measurement?
Invasive pressure measurement, though the reference standard for continuous
pressure monitoring, is subject to a number of errors and artefacts,
and recognising them is essential to avoid being misled by a falsely high or low
reading. The errors may be grouped as follows.
Errors of zeroing and levelling, already discussed, are common and important:
failure to zero, drift of the zero,
or a transducer not level with the reference point, produce offset errors,
particularly significant for the low venous pressures.
Errors of dynamic response distort the waveform: an underdamped system,
from stiff short tubing or simply the system's properties,
exaggerates the systolic pressure and adds ringing, while an overdamped system,
from air bubbles, clots, kinks, a compliant or long line,
or a partially obstructed cannula, blunts the trace and underestimates the systolic
pressure.
Air bubbles in the system are a particularly common cause of overdamping and should
be removed. Resonance, if the natural frequency is too low, exaggerates the signal.
Mechanical problems include kinking or partial obstruction of the cannula,
which damps and distorts the trace, and a cannula tip against the vessel wall,
causing a flattened or whip artefact. Movement and flushing cause transient
artefacts.
Disconnection causes a fall to zero and risks rapid blood loss,
an important safety hazard. The mean arterial pressure is the most robust value,
being relatively unaffected by damping,
so it is preferred when the waveform is distorted.
So invasive pressure errors include zeroing and levelling offsets,
underdamping exaggerating systolic with ringing, overdamping from bubbles,
clots and kinks blunting the trace, resonance,
cannula problems and disconnection — recognised by inspecting the waveform and the
flush test, with the mean pressure most reliable when the trace is distorted.
Describe the measurement of central venous pressure.
The central venous pressure, the pressure in the great veins at their entry to the
right atrium, is an important measurement reflecting the filling and function of
the right heart, and it is measured by methods that illustrate the principles we
have discussed applied to a low pressure.
The central venous pressure is measured through a catheter whose tip lies in the
superior vena cava near the right atrium.
It may be measured by a fluid column manometer,
a simple water manometer connected to the catheter,
the height of the water column above the reference point indicating the pressure in
centimetres of water; this is simple but gives only a static reading and is now
largely superseded.
More usually it is measured by an electronic transducer system,
like the arterial system, displaying the central venous pressure as a continuous
value and waveform in millimetres of mercury.
Because the central venous pressure is a low pressure,
of the order of only a few millimetres of mercury,
the accuracy of zeroing and especially of levelling is critical,
since a small error in the height of the transducer relative to the right atrium
causes a proportionately large error;
the transducer must be carefully levelled to the right atrial reference,
the phlebostatic axis.
The central venous pressure waveform shows characteristic components reflecting the
cardiac cycle — the a, c and v waves — whose interpretation gives information about
the right heart and rhythm. The trend and response to fluid are often more
informative than the absolute value.
So the central venous pressure, reflecting right heart filling,
is measured through a central catheter by a water manometer or, usually,
an electronic transducer displaying its value and waveform; being a low pressure,
accurate zeroing and levelling to the right atrial reference are critical,
and its waveform and trend, as well as its value,
give information about the right heart.
Briefly, how are pulmonary arterial and other intravascular pressures measured?
Beyond the arterial and central venous pressures,
several other intravascular and cardiac pressures may be measured in selected
patients, principally through the pulmonary artery catheter,
and a brief account completes the picture of invasive vascular pressure measurement.
The pulmonary artery, or Swan–Ganz, catheter is a balloon-tipped,
flow-directed catheter that is advanced from a central vein through the right heart
into the pulmonary artery, its progress followed by the characteristic pressure
waveforms it encounters.
As it passes, it measures, through the same transducer principle,
the right atrial pressure, the right ventricular pressure,
and the pulmonary arterial pressure, each with its characteristic waveform.
When the balloon at the tip is inflated and wedges in a branch of the pulmonary
artery, it measures the pulmonary artery occlusion, or wedge, pressure, which,
with the flow occluded, reflects the pressure transmitted back from the left
atrium, giving an estimate of left atrial and left ventricular filling pressure.
The catheter also allows the measurement of cardiac output by thermodilution and
the sampling of mixed venous blood. The same transducer principles,
zeroing and levelling apply, and the wedge pressure in particular requires careful
technique and interpretation.
The use of the pulmonary artery catheter has declined in favour of less invasive
methods of assessing cardiac function and output,
but it remains the means of directly measuring these pressures.
So the pulmonary artery catheter measures the right atrial,
right ventricular and pulmonary arterial pressures by the transducer principle as
it is advanced through the heart, and the wedge pressure when its balloon is
inflated, estimating left heart filling — using the same zeroing and levelling
principles, though its use has declined in favour of less invasive methods.
How are airway and other non-vascular pressures measured?
Pressure measurement in anaesthesia extends beyond the vascular system to the
airway and to several other non-vascular sites,
and an account of these completes the range of clinical pressure measurement.
Airway pressure is measured during ventilation to monitor the inflation of the
lungs, guard against barotrauma and assess respiratory mechanics;
it is sensed by a transducer connected to the breathing system,
which displays the airway pressure waveform and the peak,
plateau and end-expiratory pressures, with high- and low-pressure alarms.
Because airway pressures are modest, of the order of tens of centimetres of water,
and the relevant changes are not extremely rapid,
the requirements are less demanding than for the arterial waveform,
but the measurement is essential to safe ventilation.
Intracranial pressure is measured in patients with brain injury by devices placed
within the skull — an intraventricular catheter connected to a transducer,
which also allows drainage of cerebrospinal fluid,
or a transducer-tipped probe placed in the brain tissue or ventricle;
accurate measurement guides the management of raised intracranial pressure.
Intra-abdominal pressure is measured indirectly,
commonly by measuring the pressure in the bladder through a urinary catheter,
to detect the abdominal compartment syndrome.
Compartment pressures in the limbs are measured to detect compartment syndrome.
The pressures of the gas supplies are measured by Bourdon gauges, as discussed.
Each uses a method suited to its magnitude and requirements.
So non-vascular pressures are also measured:
airway pressure by a transducer on the breathing system for safe ventilation;
intracranial pressure by intraventricular or intraparenchymal devices guiding
brain-injury management; intra-abdominal pressure via the bladder;
compartment pressures in limbs; and gas-supply pressures by Bourdon gauges — each
method suited to the magnitude and requirements of the pressure measured.
What safety considerations attend invasive pressure monitoring?
Invasive pressure monitoring, while valuable,
introduces hazards arising from the invasive access and the equipment,
and an awareness of these safety considerations is important to its responsible use.
The arterial cannula carries the risks of any arterial puncture:
bleeding and haematoma, which can be significant if a connection is dislodged,
since arterial disconnection causes rapid blood loss — a particular danger
requiring secure connections, visible cannula sites and alarms;
thrombosis and distal ischaemia, especially in end-arteries,
mitigated by choosing appropriate sites and small cannulae and monitoring
perfusion; infection, mitigated by aseptic insertion and care;
and the catastrophic hazard of the inadvertent intra-arterial injection of drugs
through an arterial line mistaken for a venous line,
which can cause severe distal ischaemia and tissue loss,
prevented by clear labelling and care.
Central venous and pulmonary artery catheters carry the risks of central venous
access — including pneumothorax, arterial puncture, arrhythmias,
and infection — and the pulmonary artery catheter the additional risks of pulmonary
artery rupture, knotting and valve damage.
The pressurised flush system poses a small risk of air or fluid embolism and of
excessive flush.
Electrical safety considerations apply,
as the patient is connected through a conductive fluid column to electrical
equipment, requiring appropriate isolation to prevent microshock,
as we shall discuss. The benefit of invasive monitoring must justify these risks in
each patient.
So invasive pressure monitoring carries hazards: arterial cannula bleeding,
disconnection blood loss, thrombosis, ischaemia,
infection and inadvertent intra-arterial injection;
central and pulmonary artery catheter complications; flush-system embolism;
and electrical microshock risk — managed by secure labelled connections,
aseptic technique, appropriate site and equipment choice,
monitoring and electrical isolation, with the benefit justifying the risk.
Finally, draw together the principles of pressure measurement as they bear on
practice.
Drawing the station together, the measurement of pressure pervades anaesthesia and
critical care, and a secure understanding of its principles, devices,
dynamic response and errors is fundamental to interpreting the many pressures we
monitor.
Pressure may be measured indirectly and non-invasively,
as the arterial pressure by the auscultatory and oscillometric cuff methods,
the oscillometric method identifying the mean pressure most reliably but subject to
errors of cuff size, level and rhythm; or directly and invasively for continuous,
accurate, beat-to-beat information.
The fundamental devices are the liquid manometer,
embodying the hydrostatic principle and the basis of our units;
the aneroid Bourdon gauge for the high pressures of the gas supplies; and,
for clinical monitoring, the electronic transducer,
which converts pressure to an electrical signal by a strain-gauge diaphragm in a
Wheatstone bridge.
Invasive measurement through a fluid-filled column demands attention to zeroing and
levelling, errors in which directly falsify the reading,
and to the dynamic response — the natural frequency, which should be high,
and the damping, optimally around zero point six to zero point seven — assessed by
the flush test, with underdamping exaggerating and overdamping blunting the
systolic pressure while the mean remains reliable.
The same principles, with appropriate methods, apply to central venous,
pulmonary arterial, airway, intracranial and other pressures,
and invasive monitoring carries hazards requiring care.
So pressure measurement unites the hydrostatic,
aneroid and transducer principles with the critical concepts of zeroing,
levelling and dynamic response, and their understanding — together with the
recognition of error and the safe conduct of invasive monitoring — is fundamental
to the correct interpretation of the pressures that guide our practice.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Pressure is measured indirectly/non-invasively (the cuff:
auscultatory Korotkoff sounds, or oscillometry - which identifies the MEAN arterial
pressure most reliably at maximal oscillation) or directly/invasively for
continuous beat-to-beat data; non-invasive errors arise mainly from wrong cuff size
(too small reads high, too large reads low), cuff not at heart level,
movement and irregular rhythms.
Second, Fundamental devices: the liquid manometer (hydrostatic principle - height
proportional to pressure, the basis of mmHg and cmH2O),
the aneroid Bourdon gauge (a curved flattened tube uncoils with pressure - used for
gas-supply pressures), and the electronic transducer.
Third, The pressure transducer converts pressure to an electrical signal:
pressure deflects a diaphragm that strains a strain gauge (changing its
resistance), arranged in a Wheatstone bridge giving an output voltage proportional
to pressure; invasive monitoring needs ZEROING (open to atmosphere) and LEVELLING
(transducer at the right atrial reference/phlebostatic axis) - errors in either
directly falsify the reading, critically for low venous pressures.
Fourth, Dynamic response governs faithful reproduction of the arterial waveform (a
fundamental plus harmonics): the natural frequency should be HIGH (stiff, short,
bubble-free tubing) to avoid resonance,
and damping should be optimal (coefficient about 0.6-0.7);
UNDERdamping exaggerates systolic with ringing, OVERdamping (bubbles, clots,
kinks) blunts it and underestimates systolic - but the MEAN stays reliable.
The fast-flush (square-wave) test assesses this:
1-2 rapidly diminishing oscillations is optimal.
Fifth, The same transducer principles,
zeroing and levelling apply to central venous pressure (a low pressure - levelling
critical; a, c, v waves), pulmonary arterial and wedge pressures (pulmonary artery
catheter), and to airway, intracranial and intra-abdominal pressures;
invasive monitoring carries hazards (disconnection blood loss, thrombosis,
ischaemia, infection, inadvertent intra-arterial injection,
microshock) requiring secure labelled connections, asepsis and electrical isolation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.